From the cyber defensive security perspective, we covered how to store passwords securely for authentication systems. 
  Let’s tackle this from the offensive security perspective; if we start with a hash, how can we recognise its type, eventually crack it, and recover the original password?

Automated hash recognition tools such as hashID exist but are unreliable for many formats. For hashes that have a prefix, the tools are reliable. Use a healthy combination of context and tools.  
  If you find the hash in a web application database, it’s more likely to be MD5 than NTLM (NT LAN Manager). 
Automated hash recognition tools often get these hash types mixed up, highlighting the importance of learning yourself.

Linux Passwords
On Linux, password hashes are stored in /etc/shadow, which is normally only readable by root. 
They used to be stored in /etc/passwd, which was readable by everyone.

The shadow file contains the password information. Each line contains nine fields, separated by colons (:). 
The first two fields are the login name and the encrypted password. More information about the other fields can be found by executing man 5 shadow on a Linux system.

The encrypted password field contains the hashed passphrase with four components: prefix (algorithm id), options (parameters), salt, and hash. It is saved in the format $prefix$options$salt$hash. The prefix makes it easy to recognise Unix and Linux-style passwords; it specifies the hashing algorithm used to generate the hash.

Here’s a quick table of some of the most common Unix-style password prefixes you might encounter. 
  They are listed in the order of decreasing strength. You can read more about them by checking the man page with man 5 crypt.

Prefix	Algorithm
$y$	yescrypt is a scalable hashing scheme and is the default and recommended choice in new systems
$gy$	gost-yescrypt uses the GOST R 34.11-2012 hash function and the yescrypt hashing method
$7$	scrypt is a password-based key derivation function
$2b$, $2y$, $2a$, $2x$	bcrypt is a hash based on the Blowfish block cipher originally developed for OpenBSD but supported on a recent version of FreeBSD, NetBSD, Solaris 10 and newer, and several Linux distributions
$6$	sha512crypt is a hash based on SHA-2 with 512-bit output originally developed for GNU libc and commonly used on (older) Linux systems
$md5	SunMD5 is a hash based on the MD5 algorithm originally developed for Solaris
$1$	md5crypt is a hash based on the MD5 algorithm originally developed for FreeBSD
Modern Linux Example
Consider the following line from a modern Linux system’s shadow password file.

Terminal
root@TryHackMe# sudo cat /etc/shadow | grep strategos
strategos:$y$j9T$76UzfgEM5PnymhQ7TlJey1$/OOSg64dhfF.TigVPdzqiFang6uZA4QA1pzzegKdVm4:19965:0:99999:7:::
The fields are separated by colons. The important ones are the username and the hash algorithm, salt, and hash value.
The second field has the format $prefix$options$salt$hash.

In the example above, we have four parts separated by $:

y indicates the hash algorithm used, yescrypt
j9T is a parameter passed to the algorithm
76UzfgEM5PnymhQ7TlJey1 is the salt used
/OOSg64dhfF.TigVPdzqiFang6uZA4QA1pzzegKdVm4 is the hash value
MS Windows Passwords
MS Windows passwords are hashed using NTLM, a variant of MD4. 
They’re visually identical to MD4 and MD5 hashes, so it’s very important to use context to determine the hash type.

On MS Windows, password hashes are stored in the SAM (Security Accounts Manager). 
MS Windows tries to prevent normal users from dumping them, but tools like mimikatz exist to circumvent MS Windows security. 
Notably, the hashes found there are split into NT hashes and LM hashes.

A great place to find more hash formats and password prefixes is the Hashcat Example Hashes page. 
For other hash types, you’ll typically need to check the length or encoding or even conduct some research into the application that generated them. 
Never underestimate the power of research.


  Password Cracking
We’ve already mentioned rainbow tables as a method to crack hashes that don’t use a salt, but what if there’s a salt involved?

You can’t “decrypt” password hashes. They’re not encrypted. You have to crack the hashes by hashing many different inputs (such as rockyou.txt as it covers many possible passwords), potentially adding the salt if there is one and comparing it to the target hash. Once it matches, you know what the password was. Tools like Hashcat and John the Ripper are commonly used for these purposes.

Cracking Passwords with GPUs
Modern GPUs (Graphics Processing Units) have thousands of cores. They are specialised in digital image processing and accelerating computer graphics. Although they can’t do the same sort of work that a CPU can, they are very good at some mathematical calculations involved in hash functions. You can use a graphics card to crack many hash types quickly. Some hashing algorithms, such as Bcrypt, are designed so that hashing on a GPU does not provide any speed improvement over using a CPU; this helps them resist cracking.

Cracking on VMs?
It’s worth mentioning that VMs (Virtual Machines) normally don’t have access to the host’s graphics card(s). Depending on the virtualisation software you are using, you can set this up, but it is cumbersome. Furthermore, performance degradation occurs as you use the CPU from a virtualised OS, and when your purpose is to crack a hash, you need every extra CPU cycle.

If you want to run Hashcat, it’s best to run it on your host to make the most of your GPU, if available. If you prefer MS Windows, you are in luck; MS Windows builds are available on the website, and you can run it from PowerShell. You can get Hashcat working with OpenCL in a VM, but the speeds will likely be worse than cracking on your host.

John the Ripper uses CPU by default and works in a VM out of the box, although you may get better speeds running it on the host OS to avoid any virtualisation overhead and make the most of your CPU cores and threads.

Time to Crack Some Hashes
I’ll provide the hashes. Crack them. You can choose how. You’ll need to use online tools, Hashcat, or John the Ripper. Although you can use online rainbow tables to solve the following, we strongly advise against doing that as this will restrict your learning experience. For the first three questions, using hashcat along with rockyou.txt is enough to find the answers.

Hashcat uses the following basic syntax: hashcat -m <hash_type> -a <attack_mode> hashfile wordlist, where:

-m <hash_type> specifies the hash-type in numeric format. For example, -m 1000 is for NTLM. Check the official documentation (man hashcat) and example page to find the hash type code to use.
-a <attack_mode> specifies the attack-mode. For example, -a 0 is for straight, i.e., trying one password from the wordlist after the other.
hashfile is the file containing the hash you want to crack.
wordlist is the security word list you want to use in your attack.
For example, hashcat -m 3200 -a 0 hash.txt /usr/share/wordlists/rockyou.txt will treat the hash as Bcrypt and try the passwords in the rockyou.txt file.
  
