An alert is a core concept for any SOC team, and knowing how to handle it properly ultimately decides whether a security breach is detected and prevented, or missed and devastating. 
This is an entry level but essential room for SOC L1 analysts to understand the concept and lifecycle of alerts, from event generation to correct resolution.

Learning Objectives
Familiarise with the concept of SOC alert
Explore alert fields, statuses, and classification
Learn how to perform alert triage as an L1 analyst
Practice with real alerts and SOC workflows
Prepare for SOC Simulator and SAL1 certification
Prerequisites
Understand common attacks on networks, Windows, and Linux
Know SOC roles and duties, especially of L1 analysts

From Events To Alerts
First, an event must occur, like user login, process launch, or file download. Then, the system, like your OS, a firewall, or a cloud provider must log the event.
After that, all system logs must be shipped to a security solution like SIEM or EDR. The SOC team can receive millions of logs per day from thousands of different systems, where most of the events are expected, but some require attention. Alert, a notification generated by a security solution when a specific event or sequence of events occurs, is what saves SOC analysts from manual log review by highlighting only suspicious, anomalous events. With alerts, analysts triage just dozens of alerts per day instead of millions of raw logs.

Alert Management Platforms

Solution	Examples	Description
SIEM
System	Splunk ES, 
Elastic	SIEM have solid alert management capabilities and are a perfect choice for most SOC teams
EDR or
NDR	MS Defender,
CrowdStrike	While EDR and NDR provide their own alert dashboards, it is preferred to use SIEM or SOAR
SOAR
System	Splunk SOAR,
Cortex SOAR	Bigger SOC teams can use SOAR to aggregate and centralise alerts from multiple solutions
ITSM
System	Jira,
TheHive	Some teams may have a custom ticket management (ITSM) setup using a dedicated solution
(The GIF above is taken from Trello, a simple tool that can be adapted to ITSM needs)

L1 Role in Alert Triage
SOC L1 analysts are the first line of defence, and they are the ones who work with alerts the most. 
Depending on various factors, L1 analysts may receive zero to a hundred alerts a day, every one of which can reveal a cyberattack. 
Still, everyone in the SOC team is somehow involved in the alert triage:

SOC L1 analysts:  Review the alerts, distinguish bad from good, and notify L2 analysts in case of a real threat
SOC L2 analysts:  Receive the alerts escalated by L1 analysts and perform deeper analysis and remediation
SOC engineers:  Ensure the alerts contain enough information required for efficient alert triage
SOC manager:  Track speed and quality of alert triage to ensure that real attacks won't be missed

Now that you know how alerts are generated, it's time to review their content. 
While the details differ for every SIEM or security solution, the alerts generally have a few main properties you must understand before taking them.
Don't worry if you find some confusing, as you will hear more about some in the upcoming tasks.

Alert example from a SOC dashboard highlighting differnt main property fields

Alert Properties
№	Property	Description	Examples
1	Alert Time	Shows alert creation time. Alert usually triggers
a few minutes after the actual event	
Alert Time: March 21, 15:35
Event Time: March 21, 15:32
2	Alert Name	Provides a summary of what happened,
based on the detection rule's name	
Unusual Login Location
Email Marked as Phishing
Windows RDP Bruteforce
Potential Data Exfiltraton
3	Alert Severity	Defines the urgency of the alert,
initially set by detection engineers,
but can be altered by analysts if needed	
(🟢) Low / Informational
(🟡) Medium / Moderate
(🟠) High / Severe
(🔴) Critical / Urgent
4	Alert Status	Informs if somebody is working on the alert
or if the triage is done	
(🆕) New / Unassigned
(🔄) In Progress / Pending
(✅) Closed / Resolved
And often other custom statuses
5	Alert Verdict	Also called alert classification,
explains if the alert is a real threat or noise	
(🔴) True Positive / Real Threat
(🟢) False Positive / No Threat
And often other custom verdicts
6	Alert Assignee	Shows the analyst that was assigned
or assigned themselves to review the alert	
Assignee can sometimes be called alert owner
Assignee takes responsibility for their alerts
7	Alert Description	Explains what the alert is about,
usually in three sections on the right	
The logic of the alert generating rule
Why this activity can indicate an attack
Optionally, how to triage this alert
8	Alert Fields	Provides SOC analysts' comments
and values on which the alert was triggered	
Affected Hostname
Entered Commandline
And many more, depending on the alert
Answer the questions below

Okay, you can now read and understand the alert. What's next? Recall the second task, where you see hundreds of alerts but have to choose which to pick up first. 
The process of deciding which to take is called Alert Prioritisation, and it is crucial to ensure timely detection of a threat, especially with many alerts in the queue.

Three doors with different alert labels on them demonstrating alert prioritisation decision

Picking the Right Alert
Every SOC team decides on its own prioritisation rules and usually automates them by setting the appropriate alert sorting logic in SIEM or EDR. Below, you may see the generic, simplest, and most commonly used approach:

Filter the alerts
Make sure you don't take the alert that other analysts have already reviewed, or that is already being investigated by one of your teammates. 
You should only take new, yet unseen and unresolved alerts.
Sort by severity
Start with critical alerts, then high, medium, and finally low. 
This is because detection engineers design rules so that critical alerts are much more likely to be real, major threats and cause much more impact than medium or low ones.
Sort by time
Start with the oldest alerts and end with the newest ones. 
The idea is that if both alerts are about two breaches, the hacker from the older breach is likely already dumping your data, while the "newcomer" has just started the discovery.
What was the verdict for the "Unusual VPN Login Location" alert?

Alert Triage
Finally, you are ready to review the chosen alert! The process is quite operationally heavy, but you will soon see why every step is important. Also, note that the alert review by SOC analysts can also be called alert triage, alert handling, alert processing, alert investigation, or alert analysis. During this module, we will stick to the Alert Triage option.

Diagram showcasing required steps to triage alerts

Initial Actions
The initial steps are designed to ensure that you take ownership of the assigned alert and avoid interfering with alerts being handled by other analysts, and confirm that you are fully prepared to proceed with the detailed investigation. You achieve it by first assigning the alert to yourself, moving it to In Progress, and then familiarising yourself with the alert details like its name, description, and key indicators.

Investigation
This is the most complex step, requiring you to apply your technical knowledge and experience to understand the activity and properly analyse its legitimacy in SIEM or EDR logs. To support L1 analysts with this step, some teams develop Workbooks (also known as playbooks or runbooks) - instructions on how to investigate the specific category of alerts. If workbooks are not available, below are some key recommendations:

Understand who is under threat, like the affected user, hostname, cloud, network, or website
Note the action described in the alert, like whether it was a suspicious login, malware, or phishing
Review surrounding events, looking for suspicious actions shortly after or before the alert
Use threat intelligence platforms or other available resources to verify your thoughts
Final Actions
Your decisions here determine whether you found or missed the potential cyberattack. Some actions like Escalation or Commenting will be explained in the following rooms, so don't worry if they sound complex right now. First, decide if the alert you investigated is malicious (True Positive) or not (False Positive). Then, prepare your detailed comment explaining your analysis steps and verdict reasoning, return to the dashboard and move it to the Closed status.

SOC Dashboard Notes

If you didn't receive a flag after your triage, it means that the values you set are wrong.
You can reset the SOC dashboard by clicking Restart on the top right in the TryHackMe SIEM.
